=======================================================
LBL07007 - Protein separation by SDS-PAGE
=======================================================


+-----------+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Author: karl | Approved by: S. Thompson   | SOP No. LBL07007   |
+-----------+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Signed:   			 | Signed:                    | Effective from:    |
+-----------+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Date:     			 | Date: 2017-03-01           | Last edited:       |
+-----------+----------------------------+--------------------+

Purpose
=======
- seperate proteins for visualizing molecular weights after recombinant protein production

Scope
=====
- the extent of the SOP covers the protein electrophoresis separation chamber, the power pack driving the separation and the casting process of the SDS-PAGE gels.

Responsibilities
================
- for the operator. Before you start any lab work, as always, wear your personal protective equipment. That is, wear lab coat, suitable gloves, and eye protection. Make sure other users in the BioLab do so too, even if they are not working on the SDS-PAGE procedure, they may stumble into you etc. and they also need to be protected. As always, familiarise yourself with the MSDS of each chemical prior to use.

-CAUTION: acrylamide is a neurotoxin. Wear gloves at all times and minimise inhalation of acrylamide dust. Wipe up any spilled acrylamide containing solutions immediately with a wet paper towel and discard the towel into a closeable trash can / bin liner. Remove this trash bag from the Biohackspace to avoid drying out of the paper towel, which would allow dried acrylamide to enter air circulation.

Materials
=========
RO water
1M Tris-HCl pH 8.8 solution - use Tris-Base and pH to pH 8.8 with hydrochloric acid
Sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS) - make 50 ml of a 10% (w/v) solution, ideally use SDS in pellet form to avoid airway irritating dust
Acrylamide:Bis-Acrylamide 37.5:1 solution 40%, stored at 4ºC, acrylamide is a neruotoxin
Ammonium persulfate (APS), APS is a strong oxidizer and highly flammable
N,N,N',N'-Tetramethylethylendiamin (TEMED), TEMED is easily flammable, corrosive, it also smells badly so close it as soon as possible
Tris Base un-pHed (solid)
Glycine

General Notes
=============
Gels should be stored in a humid environment at 4ºC to reduce depolymerisation and to avoid drying out. Ideally the gels are used within 1 week or the polyacrylamide depolymerisation becomes significant and the result of your gel separation will be poor. So do not cast more gels than you will use that week.

Commercial gels are stabilized by additives and may be used after their expiration date at your own risk.


Related documents
=================
- Are other SOPs (or other documents within our framework) related to this procedure. If so then listing them here can be useful, for example the media prep SOP might be relevant when carrying out the transformation procedures and it saves time to link it here rather than describe the preparation of media in every procedure where it is used (bit like an include/import/use lol).

Definitions
===========
- Any useful glossary stuff

e.g: SOP = Standard Operating Procedure

Procedures
==========
- 7.1 The actual steps of the procedure go here …

- - 7.1.1 They can be embeded/indented as much as is reasonably helpful to describe the procedure step by step

- 7.2 It should be written in such a way that it would help anyone new to the lab to perform the procedure without having prior expertise.

Resources
=========
- This is where eternal useful documention can be linked, much like the references section in any academic paper.
