==============================
LBL04004 - Using The Incubator
==============================


+-----------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Author: S. Thompson   | Approved by: S. Thompson   | SOP No. LBL04004   |
+-----------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Signed:               | Signed:                    | Effective from:    |
+-----------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Date:                 | Date:                      | Last edited:       |
+-----------------------+----------------------------+--------------------+

Purpose
=======

This describes the usage of the BioLab incubator.

Scope
=====
This relates only to the small black bench top incubator.

Responsibilities
================
This applies to anyone using this piece of equipment. The user should
avoid contaminating the work of others when operating the incubator.

Related documents
=================
Several other procedures require the use of the incubator, see SOP
contents for further details.

Procedures
==========

The incubator consists of a front door, a digital temperature indicator and 4 buttons.

- The top left button powers on and off.
- The digital temperature display is in the top middle and gives a temperature approximately 2 degrees higher than the typical temperature measured within the incubator's chamber.
- At the top right of the front of the incubator are 3 buttons. The first of these on the left has an up arrow and increases the temperature setting. The next has a down arrow and decreases the temperature setting. The furthest to the right has a bulb symbol and switches the internal light on and off.

When opening the door of the incubator it is likely that the
temperature inside the chamber drops significantly (when set above room
temperature) so the user should be conscious of how this may effect other
experiments in progress within and minimise the amount of time left
open.

The user should clean up any spillage which might occur when
cultures are taken from or placed in the incubator.

The incubator is adapted with an electronic thermometer probe inside
the chamber and the reading from this is calculated from the integrated
Raspberry Pi controller. Currently the temperature value can be obtained
from the BioBot on FreeNode IRC, channel #london-biohackers by typing
“.incubator” (without quotes) in the channel.

Resources
=========

| London Hackspace Wiki - Incubator:
| https://wiki.london.hackspace.org.uk/view/Incubator

