================================================
LBL07002 - Heat shock transformation of *E. coli*
================================================


+-----------------------+----------------+--------------------+
| Author: S. Thompson   | Approved by:   | SOP No. LBL07002   |
+-----------------------+----------------+--------------------+
| Signed:               | Signed:        | Effective from:    |
+-----------------------+----------------+--------------------+
| Date:                 | Date:          | Last edited:       |
+-----------------------+----------------+--------------------+

Purpose
=======
This describes the procedure for heat shock transformation in E. Coli
lab strains such as DH5alpha.

Scope
=====
This should be observed for all such transformations within the LBL lab
but does not include variations of other species or other transformation
methods e.g electroporation.

Responsibilities
================
The operator performing the transformation is responsible for their own
safety and that of others in the vicinity during the procedure.

Materials
=========
- Chemically competent *E. coli*.
- Ice bucket.
- Water bath, 42C.
- Plasmid suitable for *E. coli* with antibiotic selection marker
- LB broth (0.5 to 1mL per sample)
- LB Agar plates containing antibiotic matching selection marker
- Incubator, 37C

Related documents
=================
| `LBL04002 - Using the Autoclave for Media Preparation <lbl04002.rst>`__
| `LBL07001 - Preparation of competent *E. coli* (chemical method) <lbl07001.rst>`__


Procedures
==========
#. Take frozen chemically competent aliquots and thaw on ice.
#. Add an appropriate amount of plasmid DNA (based on initial plasmid concentration). Mix carefully by pipeting or flicking the tube.
   
   **Note:** Also remember to use a negative control such as sterile water for at least one of the samples.
#. Incubate on ice for 20 to 30 minutes.
#. Heat shock by placing the sample tubes into a 42C water bath for 60 seconds.
#. Incubate on ice again for 2 minutes.
#. Add 250 to 500ul of LB medium without antibiotic (recovery step).
#. Incubate at 37C for 45 minutes (this can vary from 30 to 60 minutes, allow longer times for tranformations with ligation mixtures).
#. Plate onto LB agar plates containing suitable antibiotic and incubate at 37C overnight.
#. Check for colonies and compare with colony formation on negative controls.

