===============================================
LBL08003 - Handling spillage of micro-organisms
===============================================

+-----------+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Author:   | Approved by: S. Thompson   | SOP No. LBL08003   |
+-----------+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Signed:   | Signed:                    | Effective from:    |
+-----------+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Date:     | Date:                      | Last edited:       |
+-----------+----------------------------+--------------------+

Purpose
=======

Even under ideal conditions it is inevitable that accidents will happen.
However if the correct procedure is followed, and spillage incidents handled in a calm and sensible manner, there should be no risk of loss of containment of microbes and no impact on biosafety risk to users of the lab.

Scope
=====

This procedure is relevant for all users working with micro organisms in the biolab.
This procedure is applicable to both non-GMO and GMO scenarios.

The microbes that are in use in the biolab are categorized as Biological Agents as being unlikely to 
cause human disease (hazard group 1). In the GMO context, the microbes are considered 
to be of no or negligible risk to human health and the environment.

Therefore the primary immediate risk  from spillage are as follows:

- Injury from Broken glassware
- Electric shocks from electrical devices.
- Slipping and falling on wet patches.

It is however imperative that the lab user maintain containment of microbes
particularly GMO during a spillage, and this document describes the equipment
and procedure available to ensure this is the case.

Responsibilities
================

The lab user is responsible for their own safety and that of others in the 
vicinity during any protocol or procecure they are carrying out.



-  It is the lab user's responsibility to be familiar with these procedures, and be able to deal with a spillage of any microbe they are working with.

-  It is the lab user's responsibility to record the incident in the lab day book.


Materials
=========
The Spill kit is maintained in the lab for use in containing spills. A lab user dealing with a spills should find disposable gloves and eyewear available from stock.

The spill kit contains

- A bag of absorbent material such as sand
- Spare gloves, plastic apron, plastic over-shoe protectors
- 2 autoclave bags
- A disinfectant agent such as Dettol
- Household bleach
- bucket for temporary containment of broken glass, absorbent material
- Mop


Related documents
=================
| `London Biohackspace BioLab Usage Guidelines <biolab-usage-guidelines.rst>`__
| `lbl04006 - Using the Autoclave for Waste Deactivation <lbl04006.rst>`__ 

Definitions
===========
BSO
  Biological Safety Officer
GMO
  Genetically Modified Organism
SOP
  Standard Operating Procedure

Procedures
==========

Dealing with a spill
--------------------

#. The operator should be wearing gloves and eye protection and a plastic apron.
#. In the case of spillage, absorbant material should be placed around the spill to prevent further spread.
#. The remainder of the spill should be absorbed into blue roll
#. Once the spill is contained the absorbant material and blue rool should be placed in an autoclave bag and transported to the autoclave.
#. A strong disinfectant such as dettol from the spill kit should be applied to the area of the spill and left for 10 minutes
#. The dettol should be absorbed with blue roll and that material collected in autoclave bags.
#. The waste and sand should then be treated as contaminated waste and processed as per `lbl04006 - Using the Autoclave for Waste Deactivation <lbl04006.rst>`__
#. By now there should be no visible remaining spilled material. But a second stage of disinfection should be performed with bleach, leaving the bleach in contact with the contaminated area for 10 minutes.
#. The bleach should be rinsed off with the mop and plenty of tap water the waste can be disposed of down the drain.
#. The incident should be recorded in the day book

Restocking the spill kit
------------------------

Please contact the BSO to notify which items need to be restocked in the spill kit.


Resources
=========

| Biological agents: Managing the risks in laboratories and healthcare premises
| http://www.hse.gov.uk/biosafety/biologagents.pdf
| Spillage Management - UCL medical school guidance
| http://www.ucl.ac.uk/medicalschool/msa/safety/docs/spillagemanagement.pdf
| The Approved List of biological agents
| http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/misc208.pdf

