=======================
LBL01001 - Introduction
=======================

+----------------------------+------------------------+
| Approved by: S. Thompson   | SOP No. LBL01001       |
+----------------------------+------------------------+
| Signed: ________________   | Effective from: ______ |
+----------------------------+------------------------+
| Date: __________________   | Last edited: _________ |
+----------------------------+------------------------+

Introduction
============

In conjunction with knowledge of the `London Biohackspace BioLab Rules <biolab-rules.rst>`_ and the `London Biohackspace BioLab Usage Guidelines <biolab-usage-guidelines.rst>`__, knowledge of the London Biohackspace Standard Operating Procedures is required for everyone who is using, or who expects to use the London Biohackspace BioLab.

The London Biohackspace Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) lay out, in series, the main procedures that have been validated in the laboratory, and the best-practice approach to carrying them out to generate reliable and repeatable results. The procedures specified in the SOPs promote the safety of the individual users and others in the vicinity of the work. By following the procedures users will minimise the risk of damage to equipment and instrumentation used. It is essential that all users of the lab first undergo the laboratory induction as described in `LBL02001 <LBL02001.rst>`__ and read any SOPs that relate to the work they intend to carry out. 

`LBL03001 <LBL03001.rst>`__ describes the role of the BSO in establishing and validating SOPs, and in ensuring they are conformed to. Section 4 consists of SOPs describing the usage of the equipment and instrumentation in the laboratory. Section 5 explains Containment Level 1 (CL1) and the requirements for performing work in this setting. Further, any new projects should have a risk assessment carried out before work commences. The process for doing this is described in `lbl06001 <LBL06001.rst>`__. Section 7 contains a range of procedures for performing molecular biology work, many of which require CL1 conditions to be in place. Section 8 describes laboratory maintenance, record keeping, and cleaning.
