====================================================================
LBL03003 - Responsibilities of Principle Investigators and Lab Users
====================================================================

+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Approved by: S. Thompson   | SOP No. LBL03003   |
+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Signed:                    | Effective from:    |
+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Date:                      | Last edited:       |
+----------------------------+--------------------+

Purpose
=======

This SOP gives an overview of the responsibilities of lab users and principal investigators (PIs) carrying out a project in the London Biohackspace BioLab.

Scope
=====
All users of the London Biohackspace BioLab need to be aware of the requirements they must conform to and the responsibilities they bear when using the BioLab.

All users of the London Biohackspace BioLab need to be aware of the requirements they must conform to and the responsibilities they bear when acting as PIs.

An individual is considered to be a PI in charge of their work when carrying out any non contained use work in the BioLab that is unsupervised by another trained individual. An individual is also considered to be the PI in charge of any work done by themselves, or other users, that is part of a project, involving GMOs, for which the individual carried out the risk assessment.

Definitions
===========

BSO
  Biological Safety Officer
PI
  Principal Investigator
SOP
  Standard Operating Procedure
GMO
  Genetically Modified Organism

Responsibilities
================
 A BioLab user is responsible for following the best practices described in the London Biohackspace SOPs and associated documentation in order to carry out their work safely.

A PI is responsible for the best practices set out in the SOPs and associated documentation being followed by themselves and others during the course of work on a project. Where a risk assessment has been carried out (e.g. for a project involving GMOs) the PI is also responsible for the following of the best practices defined in that risk assessment during work by themselves, or others, on that project.

Requirements
============

BioLab Users
------------

#. BioLab users must at all times follow the `London Biohackspace BioLab Rules <biolab-rules.rst>`__. This includes:

   #. the necessity to follow the `London Biohackspace BioLab Usage Guidelines <biolab-usage-guidelines.rst>`__ when working in the BioLab;
   #. the necessity to follow the procedures described in the London Biohackspace SOPs;
   #. and, the necessity to communicate infringement of these practices to the BSO.

#. BioLab users must follow advice that the BSO gives where it pertains to safe and correct usage of the BioLab.

Principle Investigators
-----------------------

#. PIs must follow the risk assessment procedure set out in `LBL06001 <lbl06001.rst>`__ when proposing new projects.

#. In the case of a project involving GMOs the PI must ensure that any work done by themselves or others conforms with the best practice for handling these organisms or material defined as a result of the risk assessment. The PI must therefore ensure that any other lab users who might be working on the PI's project are made aware of, and comply with, these best practices.

Resources
=========

| HSE: SACGM Compendium of guidance - Biological Safety Officers
| http://www.hse.gov.uk/biosafety/gmo/acgm/acgmcomp/part1.pdf

| The Genetically Modified Organisms (Contained Use) Regulations 2014 Guidance on Regulations:
| http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/l29.htm
