=============================
LBL04007 - Using the Kill Bin
=============================


+-----------------------------+--------------------+
|  Approved by: S. Thompson   | SOP No. LBL04007   |
+-----------------------------+--------------------+
|  Signed:                    | Effective from:    |
+-----------------------------+--------------------+
|  Date:                      | Last edited:       |
+-----------------------------+--------------------+

Purpose
=======

This describes the protocol for use of the Kill Bin, which is a bleach-filled
container, located under or near the sink. This bin used for the chemical
inactivation of waste media and consumables such as disposable lab plastics.

Scope
=====

- This document should be consulted prior to use of the Kill Bin for waste
  disposal.

- The kill bin **is not suitable** for inactivation of GMOs, or plastics and
  consumables which may have come into contact with GMOs. The autoclave should
  be used instead. See `LBL04006 <lbl04006.rst>`__, "Using the autoclave for waste deactivation",
  and `LBL05001 <lbl05001.rst>`__, "Containment Level One for Biolab Users".

- The bin is also not effective for the deactivation of bacterial spores. Waste
  that may contains spores should be autoclaved.


Responsibilities
================
The operator of the Kill Bin is responsible for his or her own safety,
and the safety of others, while disposing of waste. The major danger to
health is the large quantity of bleach contained in the bin. Spilled
bleach can cause severe damage to eyes and skin, and it is harmful if
swallowed, or if its vapours are inhaled. For these reasons, and because
the surfaces of the bin may have been contaminated by waste from a
previous disposal, the bin should used with gloved hands.

Suitable hand and eye protection should be worn, particularly when moving and
refilling the kill bin with bleach.

Bleach is corrosive to stainless steel, therefore bleach should not be left
in contact with utensils or sink surfaces.

**WARNING:** Do not mix chemicals such as acids into the kill bin solution as
they will release chlorine gas.

Related documents
=================
| `LBL04006 - Using the Autoclave for Waste Deactivation <lbl04006.rst>`__ 

Materials
=========
The bin requires a mix of tap water/household bleach. See the `Refilling the Kill Bin <#emptying-the-kill-bin>`__ section below for more details.

Definitions
===========
COSHH
	Control of substances haxardous to health


Procedures
==========

Disposing of waste in the Kill Bin
----------------------------------
#. While wearing gloves, carefully open the lid of the bin. It is opened by turning the handle anticlockwise and pulling upwards.
#. Place the items to be disposed of in the bin, and ensure that they are submerged. 
#. Replace the lid and lock it by turning the handle clockwise. Ensure that the lid is locked by gently pulling on it.

Material in the Kill Bin should be fully immersed for at least 30 minutes 
to ensure full inactivation. Solid waste should then be transferred to the
general waste disposal.

Emptying the Kill Bin of solid waste
------------------------------------

The bleach solution decomposes over time at an exponential rate and this 
process is accelerated if organic waste is left sitting in the kill bin longer 
than is required for microbial inactivation.

Once waste has been fully immersed in the kill bin for a minimum of 30 mins
it should be drained and removed to the general waste. Waste should **not be
left standing overnight** as this reduces the effectiveness of the bleach.



Emptying the Kill Bin of liquid waste
-------------------------------------

The bleach bin **must not** be emptied into the sink in the biolab as it does
not exit directly to the waste pipe, but instead to a storage tank where 
gases can form.

The bin consists of kill liquid (the water/bleach mix) and solid matter. 
The solid matter should be disposed of into the general waste before 
the bleach is removed (see above).

Bleach is considered a hazardous substance under COSHH and therefore the
container is marked with a warning label. The warnings should be adhered to for
all use of household bleach in the biolab.

Empty liquid waste into a toilet or into an external open drain. Gloves and eye
protection should be worn at all times.

Refilling the Kill Bin
----------------------

The bleach in the Kill Bin should be replaced weekly. This should be logged
in the biolab day book.

Typical household bleach contains 5.25% Sodium Hypochlorite. The solution 
in the bin should be diluted from household bleach at a ratio of 40/60 bleach/water to achieve a bleach concentration of ~2% v/v. 
 
Bleach decomposes over time when exposed to air and so fresh bleach solution
should be added to the kill bin before use each day. The user should check the log to see when
the kill bin solution was last changed and add 250-500ml depending on how
fresh the solution is.


Resources
=========
| COSHH: A brief guide to the Regulations
| http://www.materials.ox.ac.uk/uploads/file/COSHHRegulations.pdf
| Working with substances hazardous to health
| http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/indg136.pdf
| Biohard safety proecures relating to bleach
| https://extranet.fhcrc.org/EN/sections/ehs/hamm/chap5/section4.html
| Inactivation (disinfection) processes
| http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/dwq/en/watreatpath3.pdf
