================================
LBL05001 - London Hackspace Wiki
================================

.. raw:: html

   <div id="globalWrapper">

.. raw:: html

   <div id="column-content">

.. raw:: html

   <div id="content" class="mw-body" role="main">

LBL05001
========

.. raw:: html

   <div id="bodyContent" class="mw-body-content">

.. raw:: html

   <div id="siteSub">

From London Hackspace Wiki

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="contentSub">

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="jump-to-nav" class="mw-jump">

Jump to: `navigation <#column-one>`__, `search <#searchInput>`__

.. raw:: html

   </div>

.. raw:: html

   <div id="mw-content-text" class="mw-content-ltr" lang="en" dir="ltr">

Containment Level One For BioLab Users
--------------------------------------

+-----------+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Author:   | Approved by: S. Thompson   | SOP No. LBL05001   |
+-----------+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Signed:   | Signed:                    | Effective from:    |
+-----------+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Date:     | Date:                      | Last edited:       |
+-----------+----------------------------+--------------------+

**1. Purpose**

Generally, under the *Genetically Modified Organisms (Contained Use)
Regulations 2014* any CL1 project being undertaken in the biolab must
follow the procedures outlined in this document in conjunction with any
procedures specified in the risk assessment for that project.

**2. Scope**

This relates to all CL1 projects.

**3. Responsibilities**

This applies to anyone carrying out these procedures as part of a CL1
project. The user should ensure that others do not inadvertently
compromise the containment of GMOs.

**5. Related documents**

`LBL06001 </view/LBL06001>`__ Project Risk Assessment Procedure for Lab
Users Proposing New Projects

`LBL06002 </edit/LBL06002?redlink=1>`__ Risk Assessment Procedure for
Lab Users Proposing Transport of GMOs Outside the Lab

`LBL04006 </view/LBL04006>`__ Using the Autoclave for Waste Deactivation

`BioLab Usage Guidelines </view/BioLab_Usage_Guidelines>`__

**6. Definitions**

GMO - Genetically Modified Organism

GMM - Genetically Modified Micro-organism

CL1 - Containment Level 1

**7. Procedures**

7.1 Risk Assessment

A written risk assessment must be approved before work can commence on
any CL1 project (see `BioLab Usage Guidelines#Special GMO
considerations </view/BioLab_Usage_Guidelines#Special_GMO_considerations>`__
for guidance on determining what is classed as CL1). The risk assessment
procedure is detailed in `LBL06001 </view/LBL06001>`__ *Project Risk
Assessment Procedure for Lab Users Proposing New Projects*.

7.2 Worksite

7.2.1 All work with GMOs as part of a CL1 project must take place within
the BioLab. The BioLab is equipped with door access control in order to
enable restriction of access to only trained users when appropriate. An
observation window is also present.

7.2.2 All work with GMMs as part of a CL1 project must be carried out on
the wet work workbench (white surface, on the left as one enters the
lab). This bench is impervious to water, resistant to acids, alkalis,
solvents, disinfectants and decontamination agents and easy to clean.

7.3 Protective clothing

Suitable protective clothing should be worn. The `BioLab Usage
Guidelines#Use of PPE </view/BioLab_Usage_Guidelines#Use_of_PPE>`__
gives guidance on this matter. If suitable PPE is not available, the BSO
should be informed immediately before any practical work is commenced.

7.4 Inactivation of GMMs

All waste (e.g. disposable gloves, cultures of GMMs) produced during a
CL1 project must be sterilised using the on-site autoclave according to
the standard procedure detailed in `LBL04006 </view/LBL04006>`__ *Using
the Autoclave for Waste Deactivation*. The user should pay special
attention to ensure the autoclave has undergone the daily test
procedure.

7.5 Safe storage of GMOs

GMOs should be stored in an appropriate area of the BioLab in such a way
as to minimise the risk of contamination. The BioLab is equipped with
door access control in order to enable restriction of access to only
trained users when appropriate.

7.6 Transporting GMOs Outside the BioLab

A written risk assessment must be approved before any GMO may be
transported outside the BioLab. The risk assessment procedure is
detailed in `LBL06002 </edit/LBL06002?redlink=1>`__ *Risk Assessment
Procedure for Lab Users Proposing Transport of GMOs Outside the Lab*.

**8. Resources**

The Genetically Modified Organisms (Contained Use) Regulations 2014
Guidance on Regulations (http://www.hse.gov.uk/pubns/books/l29.htm)

`GMO Project Risk Assessment Form <GMO_Project_Risk_Assessment_Form>`__