==============================
LBL04008 - Using The Microwave
==============================


+----------------+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Author: wzdd   | Approved by: S. Thompson   | SOP No. LBL04008   |
+----------------+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Signed:        | Signed:                    | Effective from:    |
+----------------+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Date:          | Date:                      | Last edited:       |
+----------------+----------------------------+--------------------+

Purpose
=======

This describes the usage of the BioLab microwave.

Scope
=====

This SOP describes usage of the white microwave near the BioLab door and
should be consulted prior to using the microwave.

Responsibilities
================

This applies to anyone using this piece of equipment.

The microwave can induce very high temperatures in the item being
heated, and the distribution of heat may not be even. An appropriate
level of care should be taken when removing heated items: users should
wear the insulating gloves provided for this purpose.

When heating liquids, users should consider the use of goggles.

Users are responsible for all spills and must clean the interior of the
microwave, including the inner ceiling, if the item being heated
splashes. However users should not assume that the microwave is clean
prior to using it. Items which are susceptible to contamination should
be covered.

Procedures
==========

General microwave use
---------------------

TODO. For a template, see LBL04004.

Using the microwave to prepare agarose gels
-------------------------------------------

The microwave is useful for dissolving agarose powder in water for the
preparation of agarose gels. Note that this procedure requires boiling
water for up to several minutes. Thermal gloves are required for
handling of containers of molten agarose solution, and goggles are
strongly advised.

Note that the microwave is not part of the Ethidium Bromide area. As
such, Ethidium Bromide /must not/ be present in any solutions being
microwaved. For the preparation of Ethium Bromide-innoculated agarose
gels, the molten gel should be moved to the Ethidium Bromide area prior
to application of Ethidium Bromide.

Resources
=========

TODO.

