=====================================================================
LBL10001 - Reporting of Accidents and Incidents
=====================================================================

+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Approved by: S. Thompson   | SOP No. LBL10001   |
+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Signed:                    | Effective from:    |
+----------------------------+--------------------+
| Date:                      | Last edited:       |
+----------------------------+--------------------+

Purpose
=======

This SOP deals with reporting of accidents and incidents. The purpose of this procedure is to improve the safety of lab users, and to ensure GMO containment.

Scope
=====

This SOP must be consulted whenever a lab user is injured by, or witnesses an accident or injury.

An incident is an unplanned event that results in OR could have resulted in, any of the following outcomes:

=> An injury
=> Loss of containment of GMO
=> Damage to equipment OR property
=> Harm to the environment
=> Actions that contravene any relevant rule or regulation

Responsibilities
================

Anyone can complete an accident/incident report form.


Procedures
==========

Incidents can be reported by email or by filing the webform. Links are provided below.

Please provide as much detail as you can to enable members to understand and respond to the incident. If you are reporting circumstances that involved the laboratory left in a poor state, items left out, damaged equipment etc, it would be useful if you can send photographic evidence via email to bso@biohackspace.org.

Please provide your email if you wish to receive a response to your submission. Please be assured that the information you provide will be treated in accordance with relevant data protection and appropriate discretion.

You can alternatively make incident reports directly to the Biological Safety Officer via email at bso@biohackspace.org



Resources
=========

https://docs.google.com/a/limepepper.co.uk/forms/d/14okBFoQ-SOFa-5Z-Ufm7uULumgRAx85ZyUkGhJh4bvs/viewform

